---
templateKey: blog-post
title: New Final Title
author: Author Name
authorImage: /img/chemex.jpg
date: 2019-11-11T13:59:37.642Z
description: Description
featuredimage: /img/blog-index.jpg
---
I have been working for over six years now. During this time I have been part of three organisations, Samagra, where I joined as a Senior Consultant in 2018, being the third. It is that pivotal point in my career where both, the organisation and I, are excited to meet the leader within me. My aspirations, discussions with mentors, professional development conversations with my Manager – all centre around becoming a leader, within and beyond Samagra.

Leadership, it seems, is the buzzword around me. It has been ever since I started working. I have read numerous Harvard Business Review articles about what makes a good leader and what separates a manager from a leader, heard podcasts about how to mobilise people to achieve a goal or ‘hacks’ to become an effective leader, even debated with my friends about the artificially generated need for leadership as a by-product of capitalism. Through all the essays, articles, and discussions, I realized two kinds of leadership were being discussed – leading the self to outcomes and leading others to outcomes. I found personal leadership more appealing – here, the actor (me) was within my locus of control and I had a say in how I would behave. However, precisely this made personal leadership daunting – the actor has always been in my control. How then can I produce different outcomes with the same actor? Further, how does personal leadership enable me to lead others to outcomes?

Armed with these questions (and a touch of cynicism), I joined a three-day workshop on leadership organized at Samagra. I tend to learn better through models and frameworks and I was looking forward to find one on leadership that would help me define the concept, measure myself against a benchmark and systematically climb the rungs to become a better leader. Within the first five minutes of the workshop, I realized I would learn none of that. Instead, the workshop became an intensely personal experience.

Focusing on personal leadership, the workshop nudged me to examine my existing thought and behaviour patterns, underlying beliefs about myself I held dear, even images of myself that I fought hard to preserve and project to people around me. The workshop urged me to reflect on my interaction with my circumstances, how I engaged with my teams, and how I viewed myself as an individual.

The three days were emotional turmoil for me that immediately sparked important personal and professional action. One of the sessions encouraged participants to seek and share feedback with individuals they had closely worked with. Going around the room a few times, I identified the people I thought could best add to my knowledge of myself. This session was decidedly a high, as it reinforced some of my own beliefs, while also bringing to light strengths I didn’t even know I possessed. 

With the highs, came the lows. I realised that it had been a significant amount of time since I had truly committed myself to achieving a challenging goal and not stopping before that. By the end of the workshop, I also felt extremely vulnerable – I had just laid bare my insecurities to a group of colleagues I was supposed to lead. Knowing my failures and doubts as they did now, would they still trust me and my ability to lead them? Finally, while the experience was powerful and gave me insights about being a better individual performer, I was still unsure how any of it would help me become a better leader.

 /><figcaption>The World Youth Skills Day organized in Rohtak on 15th July.</figcaption></figure><p>With almost no precedent for a state-wide, systemic transformation of the Skilling and Employment domain in the country, we worked with the government to develop a plan of action from scratch. We started by trying to design a strategy to link youth to employment opportunities. However, we soon realized that the problem should be approached differently. The scope of what we were trying to do was too broad. Given that the number of people looking for jobs would be much higher than the available jobs, creating linkages from people to jobs would be more complex than the other way around. Therefore, we changed our strategy and decided to focus on jobs which needed people. Cutting across the public and private sector, the Departments of Skilling and Employment and the Samagra team started a journey which required constant reinvention based on feedback and results.</p><p>Within a few months, Haryana catapulted itself to becoming a national leader in apprenticeship. How did this happen?</p><p>The Apprenticeship Act legislated in 1961 by the Union Government is largely underutilized (if not unutilized) by states. The Act mandates the appointment of apprentices in all establishments (government and private) with more than 40 employees. Haryana became the first state to put together a holistic strategy for its implementation, becoming the state with most number of apprentices appointed per lakh population. Till date, this position rests with Haryana. When the Saksham Haryana programme began in 2017, the number of apprentices per lakh population was 87, today it stands at over 260 and continues to rise. Over the last two years, public sector recruitment has also increased significantly with over 60,000 appointments. No state government in Haryana in the last two decades has been able to link as many people to public sector jobs. This is a noteworthy achievement not just because of the numbers involved but also because of the transparency in the process and emphasis on merit-based selection. For a state that had been riddled with corruption and “<em>sifarish</em>”-based recruitment, this was a paradigm shift. The period also saw the largest one-time recruitment of over 18,000 people to Group D government jobs. In November 2018, more than 17 lakh people applied for these jobs and criss-crossed across the state to write the recruitment exam. New trains had to be brought into service to facilitate this sudden increase in intra-state travel.</p><p>During the same time, there was an exponential increase in private sector job opportunities owing to an innovative collaboration between the Department of Employment and two cab aggregators–Ola and Uber. The basis for this win-win partnership was that the government wanted to bring more jobs to the state while the cab aggregators wanted to expand their markets. It was a perfect union. In a matter of a year, more than 55,000 people have been on-boarded by Ola and Uber as driver partners.</p><p>Starting in October 2018, the Skills Department became the focal point of transformation while the Employment Department continued its journey. As a consequence, our team split its time between the two. The focus of our efforts with respect to skilling was on transforming the 167 government-run Industrial Training Institutes (ITI) in the state, with around 66,000 students in an academic year. As in all our engagements, we started by diagnosing the problem in its entirety, visiting multiple districts, speaking to more than 80 ITI principals, trainers, students, officers etc., and analysing the available data.</p><p>At a personal level, ITI transformation has been one of the most dynamic and exciting interventions in the engagement. What started with reforms in procuring equipment, revamping assessments, filling up vacancies in trainers’ posts, has undergone a fundamental shift towards better outcomes (such as career advancement, industry linkage etc.) over the last one year. We started with ITI transformation in October 2018 and within six months, Haryana became the first state to standardize monthly formative assessments in ITIs, the first state to provide 10<sup>th</sup> and 12<sup>th</sup> grade equivalence to all its ITI students and the first state to award star ratings to each of its ITIs on outcome-based metrics. Even in this initiative, transparency has been a key factor. The results of monthly assessments and the ITI Star Ratings are available in the public domain on the Skill Development Department’s <a href=

 /><figcaption>The World Youth Skills Day organized in Rohtak on 15th July.</figcaption></figure><p>With almost no precedent for a state-wide, systemic transformation of the Skilling and Employment domain in the country, we worked with the government to develop a plan of action from scratch. We started by trying to design a strategy to link youth to employment opportunities. However, we soon realized that the problem should be approached differently. The scope of what we were trying to do was too broad. Given that the number of people looking for jobs would be much higher than the available jobs, creating linkages from people to jobs would be more complex than the other way around. Therefore, we changed our strategy and decided to focus on jobs which needed people. Cutting across the public and private sector, the Departments of Skilling and Employment and the Samagra team started a journey which required constant reinvention based on feedback and results.</p><p>Within a few months, Haryana catapulted itself to becoming a national leader in apprenticeship. How did this happen?</p><p>The Apprenticeship Act legislated in 1961 by the Union Government is largely underutilized (if not unutilized) by states. The Act mandates the appointment of apprentices in all establishments (government and private) with more than 40 employees. Haryana became the first state to put together a holistic strategy for its implementation, becoming the state with most number of apprentices appointed per lakh population. Till date, this position rests with Haryana. When the Saksham Haryana programme began in 2017, the number of apprentices per lakh population was 87, today it stands at over 260 and continues to rise. Over the last two years, public sector recruitment has also increased significantly with over 60,000 appointments. No state government in Haryana in the last two decades has been able to link as many people to public sector jobs. This is a noteworthy achievement not just because of the numbers involved but also because of the transparency in the process and emphasis on merit-based selection. For a state that had been riddled with corruption and “<em>sifarish</em>”-based recruitment, this was a paradigm shift. The period also saw the largest one-time recruitment of over 18,000 people to Group D government jobs. In November 2018, more than 17 lakh people applied for these jobs and criss-crossed across the state to write the recruitment exam. New trains had to be brought into service to facilitate this sudden increase in intra-state travel.</p><p>During the same time, there was an exponential increase in private sector job opportunities owing to an innovative collaboration between the Department of Employment and two cab aggregators–Ola and Uber. The basis for this win-win partnership was that the government wanted to bring more jobs to the state while the cab aggregators wanted to expand their markets. It was a perfect union. In a matter of a year, more than 55,000 people have been on-boarded by Ola and Uber as driver partners.</p><p>Starting in October 2018, the Skills Department became the focal point of transformation while the Employment Department continued its journey. As a consequence, our team split its time between the two. The focus of our efforts with respect to skilling was on transforming the 167 government-run Industrial Training Institutes (ITI) in the state, with around 66,000 students in an academic year. As in all our engagements, we started by diagnosing the problem in its entirety, visiting multiple districts, speaking to more than 80 ITI principals, trainers, students, officers etc., and analysing the available data.</p><p>At a personal level, ITI transformation has been one of the most dynamic and exciting interventions in the engagement. What started with reforms in procuring equipment, revamping assessments, filling up vacancies in trainers’ posts, has undergone a fundamental shift towards better outcomes (such as career advancement, industry linkage etc.) over the last one year. We started with ITI transformation in October 2018 and within six months, Haryana became the first state to standardize monthly formative assessments in ITIs, the first state to provide 10<sup>th</sup> and 12<sup>th</sup> grade equivalence to all its ITI students and the first state to award star ratings to each of its ITIs on outcome-based metrics. Even in this initiative, transparency has been a key factor. The results of monthly assessments and the ITI Star Ratings are available in the public domain on the Skill Development Department’s <a href=
